GOV.UK Frontend and asset bundling (#25)
communitiesuk/funding-service-requests-for-comments: adr/2025-02-18-govuk-frontend-and-asset-bundling.md

# GOV.UK Frontend and asset bundling

In our current systems, we download the GOV.UK Frontend zip file, unpack it, and then serve those pre-compiled assets directly. This makes it difficult to extend or modify those styles and components, but provides a simple developer experience.

We expect, as we develop a new integrated service, to need to override some variables that GOV.UK Frontend exposes or to build components and styles that extend what is provided natively. Doing this easily and effectively necessitates, to some degree, compiling and bundling GOV.UK Frontend from source.

There are a huge number of ways this could be achieved, as the JS/frontend web ecosystem tends to be fairly sprawling.

A few options are presented below to deal with our frontend JS/CSS needs.

## Options

### 1: Download GOV.UK Frontend zip, using the pre-compiled static files and assets

This option has been used by a number of the Funding Service frontends, as there is no transpilation of javascript/ SCSS nescessary this is the simplest from a production build point of view and introduces no dependencies.

> This option would not let us customise the GOV.UK Design System by exending the SCSS variables (i.e to change the width of the page while keeping all of the other styles consistent) instead requiring manually overriding the CSS styles. We would also need to re-run the exract and copy routine any time we changed the apps styles.

Author: ```suggestion
This option would not let us customise the GOV.UK Design System by extending the SCSS variables (i.e to change the width of the page while keeping all of the other styles consistent) instead requiring manually overriding the CSS styles. We would also need to re-run the extract and copy routine any time we changed the apps styles.
```

> This option would not let us customise the GOV.UK Design System by extending the SCSS variables (i.e to change the width of the page while keeping all of the other styles consistent) instead requiring manually overriding the CSS styles. We would also need to re-run the extract and copy routine any time we changed the apps styles.

Reviewer: Missing ' in `apps` in the last line

- as the output of an SPA is a single HTML/ JS target vite would serve development assets (even styles) through one JS file which was loaded and would then inject styles into the template, this caused a noticeable Flash of Unstyled Content during any page load and sets a precedent of the app not being performant
- additional styles/ code would have to be imported into the entry files and then all served at once, ideally we would be able to process files separately and either include them or not include them on any given page

#### 3.b: Configure vite ourselves

By adding our own `package.json` and creating a dependency on `vite` ourselves we take more control of the bundling and configuration. This allows us to: 
- serve CSS and JS directly allowing the dev server to cache assets and the page to load appropriately
- have any number of assets which can be split up as required
- support different transpilation/ file types
- retain the good developer experience of the `vite` dev server

> Importantly this option also allows our version management process (currently `renovate`) to suggest security and major upgrades to the build dependencies and

Reviewer: Dangling `and` at the end of the paragraph
